a5py/README.rst, before:

ASCOT5 Python library
=====================

`a5py` is a python library for pre- and postprocessing `ASCOT5` relevant
data. The library contains tools to access and modify `HDF5` files used for
`ASCOT5` input and output. Some higher level scripts for running `ASCOT5` are
also provided.

This package is compatible with Python 3.X. Required libraries are `numpy`,
`scipy`, `h5py`. Additionally, `matplotlib` is required for plotting routines
and `doxypypy` is needed for generating Doxygen documentation.

Websites
--------

* Source code: https://version.aalto.fi/gitlab/ascot/python/tree/master/a5py
* ASCOT5: https://version.aalto.fi/gitlab/ascot/ascot5

Installation
------------

Make sure you have `pip` and `virtualenv` installed first (and `python3`).
Begin by creating your own virtual environment:::

    virtualenv -p python3 --system-site-packages ascot
    source ascot/bin/activate

If you can't use/install virtualenv, you can use `venv` instead:::

    python3 -m --system_site_packages venv ascot
    source ascot/bin/activate

Flag --system-site-packages makes your virtual environment inherit packages
already present in your system. This is necessary if you wish to do any plotting
as installing `matplotlib` is not possible with just `pip`.

Now you have your very own virtual environment. See what packages are present
with:::

    pip list

If necessary, install the required packages:::

    pip install numpy
    pip install scipy
    pip install h5py

and then you can install `a5py`:::

    pip install /path/to/a5py

You can now import `a5py` as any library. Note that `a5py` contains scripts that
can be used directly from command line after the installation e.g.:::

    a5gui ascot.h5
    (Open GUI on ascot.h5)

To exit your virtualenvironment, type::

    deactivate

Updating a5py
--------------

Everytime the source code is modified, e.g. by pulling a new version from git::

    git pull --rebase

or if you modify the source locally, `a5py` needs to be reinstalled. You can do
this with::

    pip install --ignore-installed path/to/a5py

or::

    pip install -I path/to/a5py

Note that if a file was removed from a5py, it still lingers in virtualenv. This
can be fixed by creating a new virtualenv.

Subpackages
-----------

- ascot5io        -- Read and write `ASCOT5` `HDF5` file. Modify existing
                     HDF5 files (copy input fields etc.) Use this module for
                     generating input and accessing output.

- marker          -- Module for evaluating marker specific quantities and
                     plotting markers. This module is mostly used by State
                     and Orbit objects from Ascot output.

- dist            -- Module for evaluating and plotting distributions. Used
                     by Ascot distribution output.

- gui             -- Graphical user interface for accessing Ascot5 HDF5 file.
                     In GUI, one can e.g. set descriptions and which inputs are
                     active. Also some tools for plotting input and output are
                     available.

- preprocessing   -- Generate input data from other formats such as `EQDSK`.

- postprocessing  -- Higher level data-analysis.

- ascot4interface -- Produce `ASCOT5` input from `ASCOT4` data.

Scripts
-------

Higher level scripts for running and preparing `ASCOT5` are found in a5py/bin.
To add a new script, place it in the folder and add the script name to setup.py
inside scripts=[] brackets.

By convention, each script should begin with an "a5".

Commit message:

Modify the installation instructions and surrounding setuptools infrastructure
1. Use requirements.txt to track dependencies
2. Modify setup.py to read in requirements.txt
3. Add gitignore because it is common to store virutal environment
within project directories
4. Modify README accordingly. Suggest use of "editable" pip install.

a5py/README.rst, after:

ASCOT5 Python library
=====================

`a5py` is a python library for pre- and postprocessing `ASCOT5` relevant
data. The library contains tools to access and modify `HDF5` files used for
`ASCOT5` input and output. Some higher level scripts for running `ASCOT5` are
also provided.

This package is compatible with Python 3.X. Required libraries are `numpy`,
`scipy`, `h5py`. Additionally, `matplotlib` is required for plotting routines
and `doxypypy` is needed for generating Doxygen documentation.

Websites
--------

* Source code: https://version.aalto.fi/gitlab/ascot/python/tree/master/a5py
* ASCOT5: https://version.aalto.fi/gitlab/ascot/ascot5

Installation
------------

Make sure you have `pip` and `virtualenv` installed first (and `python3`).
Begin by creating your own virtual environment:::

    virtualenv -p python3 --system-site-packages ascot
    source ascot/bin/activate

If you can't use/install virtualenv, you can use `venv` instead:::

    python3 -m venv --system-site-packages ascot
    source ascot/bin/activate

Flag --system-site-packages makes your virtual environment inherit packages
already present in your system. This is necessary if you wish to do any plotting
as installing `matplotlib` is not possible with just `pip`.

Now you have your very own virtual environment. See what packages are present
with:::

    pip list

Then install `a5py` and the requirements will be picked up from
`requirements.txt`:::

    pip install -e /path/to/a5py

If not, install the required packages:::

    pip install -r requirements.txt

The `-e` in the command above makes the package "editable", meaning links to
the source files are made in the site-packages folder rather than copies. This
means you can change and update the source files, and this will be immediately
reflected in the `a5py` Python package.

You can now import `a5py` as any library. Note that `a5py` contains scripts that
can be used directly from command line after the installation e.g.:::

    a5gui ascot.h5
    (Open GUI on ascot.h5)

To exit your virtual environment, type::

    deactivate

Updating a5py
--------------

If you did not use the `-e` flag to install `a5py` in your virtual environment,
then everytime the source code is modified, e.g. by pulling a new version from
git::

    git pull --rebase

or if you modify the source locally, `a5py` needs to be reinstalled. You can do
this with::

    pip install --ignore-installed path/to/a5py

or::

    pip install -I path/to/a5py

Note that if a file was removed from a5py, it still lingers in virtualenv. This
can be fixed by creating a new virtualenv.

Subpackages
-----------

- ascot5io        -- Read and write `ASCOT5` `HDF5` file. Modify existing
                     HDF5 files (copy input fields etc.) Use this module for
                     generating input and accessing output.

- marker          -- Module for evaluating marker specific quantities and
                     plotting markers. This module is mostly used by State
                     and Orbit objects from Ascot output.

- dist            -- Module for evaluating and plotting distributions. Used
                     by Ascot distribution output.

- gui             -- Graphical user interface for accessing Ascot5 HDF5 file.
                     In GUI, one can e.g. set descriptions and which inputs are
                     active. Also some tools for plotting input and output are
                     available.

- preprocessing   -- Generate input data from other formats such as `EQDSK`.

- postprocessing  -- Higher level data-analysis.

- ascot4interface -- Produce `ASCOT5` input from `ASCOT4` data.

Scripts
-------

Higher level scripts for running and preparing `ASCOT5` are found in a5py/bin.
To add a new script, place it in the folder and add the script name to setup.py
inside scripts=[] brackets.

By convention, each script should begin with an "a5".
